Add migration guide for Material 3 (#10076)
flutter/website: src/release/breaking-changes/material-3-migration.md

---

> title: Migrating to Material 3

Reviewer: Since this is a guide, consider a task based title:

```suggestion
title: Migrate to Material 3
```

description: >-

>   Migration guide for updating your UI from Material 2 to Material 3.

Reviewer: For descriptions, it's generally best to focus on why/what users will use the page for, rather than explaining what it is.

```suggestion
  Learn how to migrate your Flutter app's UI from Material 2 to Material 3.
```

---

## Summary

The Material library has been updated to match the Material 3 Design spec.
Changes include new components and component themes, updated component visuals,
and much more. Many of these updates are seamless. You’ll see the new version
of an affected widget when recompiling your app against the 3.16 (or later)
release. But some manual work is also required to complete the migration.

## Migration guide

Prior to the 3.16 release, you could opt in to the Material 3 changes by
setting the `useMaterial3` flag to true. As of the Flutter 3.16 release

> (November 2023), useMaterial3 is true by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(November 2023), `useMaterial3` is true by default.
```

`ColorScheme.surfaceTint` indicates an elevated widget.
Some widgets use different colors.

To return your app’s UI to its previous behavior (which we don't particularly
recommend):
* Set `Colors.grey[50]!` to `ColorScheme.background`
   (when the theme is `Brightness.light`).
* Set  `Colors.grey[850]!`to `ColorScheme.background`
   (when the theme is `Brightness.dark`).

Code before migration:

```dart
theme: ThemeData(
  colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(seedColor: Colors.deepPurple),
),
```

Code after migration:

```dart
theme: ThemeData(
  colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(seedColor: Colors.deepPurple).copyWith(
    background: Colors.grey[50]!,
  ),
),
```

```dart
darkTheme: ThemeData(
  colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(
    seedColor: Colors.deepPurple,
    brightness: Brightness.dark,
  ).copyWith(background: Colors.grey[850]!),
),
```

The `ColorScheme.surfaceTint` value indicates a component's elevation in
Material 3. Some widgets might use both `surfaceTint` and `shadowColor` to
indicate elevation (for example, `Card` and `ElevatedButton`) and others might
only use `surfaceTint` to indicate elevation (such as `AppBar`).

> If you must return to a widget’s previous behavior, set, set `Colors.transparent`

Reviewer 2: Suggest: 'To return to the widget's previous behavior'

Reviewer 3: The reason I said "must" is that this page spends a lot of time telling folks how to return to previous behavior, but we really don't want to encourage that.

to `ColorScheme.surfaceTint` in the theme. To differentiate a widget’s shadow
from the content (when it has no shadow), set the `ColorScheme.shadow` color to
the `shadowColor` property in the widget theme without a default shadow color.

Code before migration:

```dart
theme: ThemeData(
  colorScheme: ColorScheme.fromSeed(seedColor: Colors.deepPurple),
),

> ``

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
````

Author: Wow good catch

Some components couldn't merely be updated to match the Material 3 Design spec
but needed a whole new implementation. Such components require manual migration
since the Flutter SDK doesn’t know what, exactly, you want.

Replace the Material 2 style [`BottomNavigationBar`][] widget with the new
[`NavigationBar`][] widget. It’s slightly taller, contains pill-shaped
navigation indicators, and uses new color mappings.

Code before migration:

```dart
BottomNavigationBar(
  items: const <BottomNavigationBarItem>[
    BottomNavigationBarItem(
      icon: Icon(Icons.home),
      label: 'Home',
    ),
    BottomNavigationBarItem(
      icon: Icon(Icons.business),
      label: 'Business',
    ),
    BottomNavigationBarItem(
      icon: Icon(Icons.school),
      label: 'School',
    ),
  ],
),
```

Code after migration:

```dart
NavigationBar(
  destinations: const <Widget>[
    NavigationDestination(
      icon: Icon(Icons.home),
      label: 'Home',
    ),
    NavigationDestination(
      icon: Icon(Icons.business),
      label: 'Business',
    ),
    NavigationDestination(
      icon: Icon(Icons.school),
      label: 'School',
    ),
  ],
),
```

Check out the complete sample on

> [migrating from BottomNavigationBar from NavigationBar][].

Reviewer: There are two "froms" here. Consider something like:

```
For more guidance, check out another sample of
[migrating from `BottomNavigationBar` to `NavigationBar`][].
```

(Do upgrade the below link definition as well to whatever you decide :)

```dart
Drawer(
  child: ListView(
    children: <Widget>[
      DrawerHeader(
        child: Text(
          'Drawer Header',
          style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.titleLarge,
        ),
      ),
      ListTile(
        leading: const Icon(Icons.message),
        title: const Text('Messages'),
        onTap: () { },
      ),
      ListTile(
        leading: const Icon(Icons.account_circle),
        title: const Text('Profile'),
        onTap: () {},
      ),
      ListTile(
        leading: const Icon(Icons.settings),
        title: const Text('Settings'),
        onTap: () { },
      ),
    ],
  ),
),
```

Code after migration:

```dart
NavigationDrawer(
  children: <Widget>[
    DrawerHeader(
      child: Text(
        'Drawer Header',
        style: Theme.of(context).textTheme.titleLarge,
      ),
    ),
    const NavigationDrawerDestination(
      icon: Icon(Icons.message),
      label: Text('Messages'),
    ),
    const NavigationDrawerDestination(
      icon: Icon(Icons.account_circle),
      label: Text('Profile'),
    ),
    const NavigationDrawerDestination(
      icon: Icon(Icons.settings),
      label: Text('Settings'),
    ),
  ],
),
```

> Check out the complete sample on [migrating from Drawer from NavigationDrawer][].

Reviewer: There are two "froms" here. Consider something like:

```
For more guidance, check out another sample of
[migrating from `Drawer` to `NavigationDrawer`][].
```

(Do upgrade the below link definition as well to whatever you decide :)

      ),
      Tab(
        icon: Icon(Icons.brightness_5_sharp),
      ),
    ],
  ),
),
```

[`SegmentedButton`][], an updated version of [`ToggleButtons`][],
uses fully rounded corners, differs in layout height and
size, and uses a Dart `Set` to determine selected items.

Code before migration:

```dart
enum Weather { cloudy, rainy, sunny }

ToggleButtons(
  isSelected: const [false, true, false],
  onPressed: (int newSelection) { },
  children: const <Widget>[
    Icon(Icons.cloud_outlined),
    Icon(Icons.beach_access_sharp),
    Icon(Icons.brightness_5_sharp),
  ],
),
```

Code after migration:

```dart
enum Weather { cloudy, rainy, sunny }

SegmentedButton<Weather>(
  selected: const <Weather>{Weather.rainy},
  onSelectionChanged: (Set<Weather> newSelection) { },
  segments: const <ButtonSegment<Weather>>[
    ButtonSegment(
      icon: Icon(Icons.cloud_outlined),
      value: Weather.cloudy,
    ),
    ButtonSegment(
      icon: Icon(Icons.beach_access_sharp),
      value: Weather.rainy,
    ),
    ButtonSegment(
      icon: Icon(Icons.brightness_5_sharp),
      value: Weather.sunny,
    ),
  ],
),
```

Check out the complete sample on

> [migrating from ToggleButtons from SegmentedButton][].

Reviewer: There are two "froms" here. Consider something like:

```
For more guidance, check out another sample of
[migrating from `ToggleButtons` to `SegmentedButton`][].
```

(Do upgrade the below link definition as well to whatever you decide :)

[migrating from BottomNavigationBar from NavigationBar]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/BottomNavigationBar-class.html#material.BottomNavigationBar.2
[migrating from Drawer from NavigationDrawer]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/Drawer-class.html#material.Drawer.2
[migrating from ToggleButtons from SegmentedButton]: {{site.api}}/flutter/material/ToggleButtons-class.html#material.ToggleButtons.1

#### New components

>  * `MenuBars and Cascading Menus` provide a desktop-style menu system that is

Reviewer: Should this not be in code syntax? "Menu bars and cascading menus"
